so oh boy i sure do love being perceived
as a gifted child i hope i don't end up
as being a perfectionist perfectionist
burnout with
burnt out i suppose with depression
anxiety unfulfilled expectations and no
real interests or goals
so this is something that someone
cross-posted to our subreddit you know
it's a meme we've had a couple of
streams about burnout and gifted kids
so today what i'd like to talk to you
all a little bit about is
the pathway from gifted child to burnt
out perfectionist
as well as sort of the way that society
actually sets gifted children up to kind
of fail
so i know it's kind of interesting but
when we think about a gifted child
we think about we perceive
gifted as an advantage
but in my experience working with a lot
of gifted children it's not always an
advantage and in fact oftentimes it can
be a burden
and so i've seen this a lot in our
community i've worked with a lot of
people who kind of fall into that this
category i suppose i sort of fall into
it as well
where i grew up kind of get i'm gifted
right so like school was easy for me i
was told from a very young age that i
was smart
i was also kind of held accountable for
like not studying right there like i'd
kind of like not study very much and
maybe get a b plus or an a minus
and my teachers would tell my parents
the same thing every single
parent-teacher conference they'd always
say well if all look just applied
himself he would be the best student in
the class
if he only just like
studied more he'd be the best student in
the class right they were like he's
super smart he has a lot of potential
right so they use these words like they
talk about how smart i am they talk
about all the potential i have and if i
just applied myself i'd be you know i'd
be such a
i'd be the best student
so it's kind of interesting because we
perceive giftedness as an advantage
but as one of my teachers once told me
we'll kind of get to this towards the
end
they once explained to me that um this
is in in not in medical school but when
i was training to become a psychiatrist
i had a supervisor who once told me that
gifted gifted children or special needs
children and what that literally means
is that like the needs of a child who's
gifted are actually different from the
average child and the parents who
recognize that and recognize that this
child is going to need like a slightly
different structure a different
curriculum or a different way of being
raised are the ones that end up sort of
doing a really good job and oddly enough
in her clinical experience she found
that much like any other special needs
children um
you know kids that were not
treated appropriately despite their
gifts were the ones that kind of
struggled so this statement when i first
heard it i thought was like absolutely
ridiculous kind of blew my mind a little
bit but i respected the supervisor a lot
and i started thinking about it
so what i'd like to share with you all
today is sort of the pathway that a
gifted child takes
how a society treats them how parents
treat them the kind of struggles they
face or the influences that they have
let's not even call it a struggle
because it may not be a struggle and
then sort of how they end up so i'd like
to kind of share with that with you all
today okay
so the first thing that tends to happen
is when a child is gifted they
te school tends to be easy right so if
you kind of think about it
developmentally
there are a lot of different things that
happen in school so let's talk about
school so school is a place where you
get you socialize right so you get
socialization skills it's a place that
you learn and people think that school
is primarily about learning and it is
primarily about learning but it's just
not about
learning that the subject material so
sure we learn like arithmetic and
mathematics and all that kind of stuff
we learn history and science and all
that good stuff
but really school if you kind of look at
it developmentally is a wonderful
opportunity to learn certain key things
socialization is a really important
piece the other thing is like habits and
how to study and this is the first sort
of disadvantage that i think gifted
children sort of face
is that you know if you're young and
you're gifted school is so easy that you
sort of get by without the luxury of
studying and so we kind of perceive this
as an advantage right like if you have
to if you go through school and you
don't study like that's easy like it's
easy easy clap right
and so it is and that sort of makes
sense
but the the interesting thing that i
found is that oftentimes being
intelligent especially when you're super
young as a kid actually sets you up for
failure down the road because you never
need to learn
the habituated study like
technique that you kind of need to that
that you need to succeed later on so for
a normal kid what tends to happen is
like they don't have to study like in
first grade but maybe like second grade
third grade they have to learn how to
study like once a week maybe they like
learn how to study the night before the
test because it doesn't come easily to
them
and then fourth grade fifth grade now
you're you're doing homework a couple
days a week you know you're studying two
or three days before the test then you
kind of hit middle school where maybe
you're studying like four days before
the test and so there's this very
graduated sense of increasing
responsibility as you go further and
further in school
and it's sort of designed that way right
we're not like no teacher has a six six
year old that they're like giving 14
hours of homework a week to it's just
absurd and then at the top end of the
spectrum in terms of study habits and
what we demand of students you have
something like let's say law school or
medical school or things like that where
people are regular studying like 60
hours a week 80 hours a week in medical
school because you know people have have
grown up and have built enough of a
study habit where they can actually
handle that pace of study
so what happens with the gifted kid so
the gifted kid you know when you sort of
level up your skill to level one like in
the first grade and then you level up
your studying skill to level two in the
second grade and level three in the
third grade so the gifted kid never
actually has to like grind that xp for
levels like one through five of studying
habits
and so they sort of managed to get b's
or a's without really minimal with
minimal studying or no studying at all
and then seventh grade rolls around
eighth grade rolls around they start to
struggle a little bit maybe they get b's
they're still not learning how to study
because they sort of skipped that part
of of the you know the skill building
and we'll kind of get to that later and
then what tends to happen with gifted
kids is that they don't need to study
don't need to study don't need to study
and then they hit a wall
they finally get into some kind of
situation where their raw intellect
cannot
is no longer sufficient to handle the
schoolwork that they're supposed to
handle
but they've trained themselves at that
point they've customized themselves at
that point to managing school with raw
intellect
and so when that kind of falls short
they like they really kind of really hit
a wall it's a very very hard cliff to to
overcome
and so this is kind of the first thing
that that sort of shoots gifted kids in
the foot and this also leads to kind of
this idea of perfectionism and burnout
because then they like you know then
they they struggle a lot they don't
understand why they can't do it they
they try they know they're smart
everyone's talking to them about
potential they start to feel really bad
about themselves so the first kind of
interesting thing that gifted kids run
into is the fact that they sort of don't
develop the proper study habits because
you know as a six-year-old it's kind of
not your fault because like you're not
mature enough as a six-year-old to
realize like oh i need you know to have
good study habits so even though the
teacher said this last tuesday and i
understand that i don't need to study
i'm going to sit down and like practice
my study habits it doesn't make any
sense it's like completely artificial
so that's the first thing that happens
is that they kind of hit this wall of of
you know not being able to study
the second thing to consider is the
expectation so another thing that really
leads gifted kids kind of down the wrong
path is
the burden of expectation that's placed
upon them so from a very young age
they're told oh you're gifted you're
smart you're special you have so much
potential and so what that starts to do
is it constructs like a very very lofty
goal in their minds right so i'm going
to use kind of an analogy which is kind
of like you know if i think about an
amazing home like i think about a
mansion it can have a beautiful
blueprint and i can buy a gigantic piece
of land and i can look at that and i can
say like oh like this this home or this
this blueprint has so much potential
and sometimes we kind of forget that
like
you can have like you can have a
blueprint for a mansion but that's gonna
actually take way more work to achieve
than like building a shack so the other
really interesting thing that that we
sort of kind of get wrong societally is
that we assume that when someone is
gifted
things are actually going to be easier
for them that they need to work less to
accomplish the same amount
but in my experience living up to a
gifted child's potential involves more
work it's sort of like you know it's
just like building a shack versus
building a mansion like sure the mansion
is capable of so much more than the shaq
is capable of but let's not forget for a
moment that the amount of effort that it
goes into building a mansion is actually
way more than what's required to build a
shack this is the second place that
gifted kids kind of get tripped up
because everyone around
is looking at them and they're sort of
saying
oh like this is an amazing mansion like
you could build such an amazing mansion
and we all kind of forget for a moment
that like actually living up to that
potential is very very difficult and
requires a lot more of an investment
than building a shack
and so this gap between what people
expect of you and also the idea that
things should be easier for you
kind of compound on themselves and sort
of end up with gifted kids kind of
feeling like they're they're failing at
everything right because they have all
this potential
and they're not they're just not living
up to it
so the other thing that we'll see in
gifted kids is that what what tends to
happen is that they will put in some
amount of work
but they're expecting a mansion when
all they've really put in is as much as
building a shack
i may have lost you a little bit there
but let me just explain
so
you know what a gifted kid will do is
they'll like look at their peers right
and they'll say like oh like this person
did this and they're able to accomplish
this so like i should be able to do that
too and so if you look at your neighbors
who are building a shack and they're
like whoa they went to home depot and
they got like 100 pounds of wood and
they built their shack over a weekend
and then like you go and get your 100
pounds of wood from home depot and you
start like brought to you by home depot
i suppose um and you start building your
mansion like i know it sounds kind of
weird but you know 100 pounds of wood
may be enough to build a shack but it's
nowhere near enough to build a mansion
and then what gifted kids will do is
they'll look at like the foundation that
they've laid with a hundred pounds of
wood and they'll be like where's the i
don't even have a shack like you know
it's it's like they look at what they've
accomplished when they put in the same
amount of energy as someone else and
they get really confused because this
person has a complete shack over here
and like i have like barely the
beginnings of a mansion and so then that
sort of negatively impacts them they
start to like feel like they're actually
inferior to these other people because
they've been told oh you're smarter than
the kid next door like why the hell is
the kid next door getting into college
and like you're not even getting into
college and so it all sort of sort of
sort of compounds right because even for
the gifted kid they're not trying to
build a shack because they've been told
they've been they're gifted their entire
life so it's not enough to be average if
you're gifted so what you have to do is
you try to you know build a mansion
because that's what you've been
told that you're capable of that's the
expectation you set for yourself and
then you're you're left kind of
scratching your head and wondering like
why you don't even have a shack yet even
though you studied for a month and they
studied for a month you're not getting
as much as that they're getting
and it's kind of super bizarre right
because we don't we just don't think
about it that way we think that if
you're gifted that means that everything
should be easier for you that it not
only they may need a hundred pounds of
wood to build a shack but you should be
able to build a shack and 50 pounds of
wood it should be easier for you but it
turns out paradoxically being harder
and then we sort of end up with kind of
the final state of a gifted kid which if
we kind of think about it internally is
a state of like really shame and low
self-esteem so all this stuff kind of
compounds right like you're told you're
smart so you set this expectation of
what you're capable of like way up here
and then like you know first grade goes
by and you're up here second grade goes
by and you're up here third grade goes
by and you're up here boom boom boom
fourth grade fifth grade sixth grade
10th grade 11th grade and then you kind
of tank right and as you go to college
suddenly like you don't have the study
skills involved and now in the gap
between what you're capable of and what
you actually accomplish this gap is
where shame comes from this is the shame
gap that gifted kids inevitably fall
into
which is when they fall short of what
their expectations are and this could be
once again
due to the fact that you're you know
you're setting out to build a mansion
and you ended up not even building a
shack right so all of these
discrepancies between your expectations
and your accomplishments
in that gap and the bigger the gap is
the more it's filled with shame
so then what happens is kids are ashamed
right because they should be doing more
they should be doing better
and then like the shame then further
compounds and makes it hard to find
motivation and this is where you kind of
get burnout so then like you have these
gifted kids and you're like hey man just
like go to a community college you don't
have to go to an ivy league school
school you don't have to go to like
harvard or stanford or mit just like go
to your local community college and in
that comes a bunch of shame because
you've been told your entire life that
you're better than that right
and so you start to develop this ego
of being a super smart kid and then this
leads to avoidance of things because all
you're left with is the identity of a
smart kid so you can never even bring
yourself to go to community college
because smart kids don't go to community
college in your mind that's where the
stupid kids go and if you go to
community college then suddenly you've
lived your entire life for 20 years
being told you're a smart kid it's the
only that's your biggest strength it's
the one that everyone keeps talking
about and now like suddenly you have to
relegate yourself to being a stupid kid
and in that gap is where the shame lives
in that gap is where the ego lives okay
so it's really really hard right because
you're set up with these expectations
people don't really acknowledge that
because you're capable of a lot it's
actually going to take like a lot of
work to take that potential and bring it
to fruition
right and that's like that's the biggest
thing is people just lose sight of the
fact that building a mansion actually
takes more work than building a shack
and your entire life people have told
you like you should build this mansion
because that's what you're capable of
and so then we kind of get to all right
so like what do we do about it right so
if you're a gifted kid who's kind of
perfectionistic and burnt out and like
society has sort of set you up this way
i'm not saying that you're not
individually responsible as well but i
do think that there's a whole reason so
when we have like a generation of burnt
out gifted kids i think we have to be
fair and be a little bit scientific and
kind of acknowledge that this may not be
like an individual problem right we've
got a generation of kids like this like
maybe there's something societal going
on and i think paradoxically we sort of
set these kids up to
struggle and so then the question
becomes okay like what do we do about it
so the first thing you should do if
you're a gifted kid is to stop
comparison right like comparison is is
the foundation of getting out of this
problem
because as long as you are comparing
yourself and this is part of the issue
is that if you think about the word
gifted
what does the word gifted imply it is a
word that has no meaning
outside of a comparative framework you
guys get that the only way you can be
gifted is if there are other people who
are not gifted
and so essentially what happens is like
the whole idea of a gifted kid only
exists in relationship to another kid
and so what we find in the minds of
gifted kids is that they're comparing
themselves all the time oh i don't want
to go to community college that's where
the stupid people go oh i don't know
like why i can't do what my friend is
capable of like he's able to do so much
why am i not able to do so much i have
an older sibling who did fantastic
and now i have big shoes to fill right
there's so much comparison all of the
expectations that gifted kids have don't
come from themselves
right because if you actually based your
expectations on what you're capable of
you'd be capable of a b c d or an f
that's what that would be a realistic
expectation but instead you create these
artificial expectations that are based
on comparison and why do gifted kids do
that because it starts with their
parents it starts with their teachers
we're all told that we're gifted which
is by definition a comparison to all of
the other kids
and so then what happens is you're
looking over at the shack and you've got
this blueprint for a mansion and they
give you some wood and then you try to
build the mansion and like you don't
even have a roof when this person has a
completely built shack and then you kind
of look at yourself well like man i must
be like a super idiot right like and
it's just it's so bizarre that when we
set up this kind of when we start with
this framework of a comparison
we sort of doom ourselves to failure
because there's like we're just
it's just it's never going to work
because you can't ever
base the expectations of your life and
what you're capable of based on what
someone else is doing
right if someone else is happy studying
chemical engineering it doesn't mean
that you're going to be happy studying
chemical engineering if somebody else is
happy dating someone of the opposite sex
it doesn't mean that you're going to be
the whole point is as individuals as
humans we're individuals and if you're a
gifted kid the first thing you've got to
do is let go of all comparison
so next thing is to
recognize that your road is going to be
a rough one right so like when someone
sets out to build a mansion they know in
their mind that like this is gonna take
a while right
you can't expect to build a mansion in
the same amount of time it would take
someone to build a shack
and so if you're a gifted kid and you
expect a lot from yourself
okay
recognize that this is going to be a
long road and the greater your potential
is the longer it's going to take for you
to get there and this is something that
i can understand in hindsight like so i
grew up as a gifted kid and was like in
you know the special classes or whatever
i actually still remember when i was in
eighth grade my grades started to dip
and when i went to high school
um i didn't qualify for based on my
grades like my high school was like yeah
he needs to be in like regular english
he can't be in like advanced english or
he doesn't meet the criteria for
advanced english and so my parents were
really really not happy with that
because they have they have such a smart
boy you know he's so smart he just needs
to apply himself so they went to the
school and i remember having a meeting
with the the honors english teacher or
whatever and then he's like do you want
to be in this class and i was like yeah
i want to be in the class and my parents
were like yeah he should be he belongs
he belongs in the class
right and so the teacher was like okay
fine because you know
i mean you're not gonna you know there
are some parents that could potentially
be annoying so you're like whatever
and so i ended up being in the class
that i really didn't belong and i really
didn't do very well
right because i didn't have the work
ethic but it propagates sort of this
idea of like you can handle it
so like i started off you know going on
the wrong track kind of like in in high
school it took me
i took me five years to graduate from
college right with a 2.5 gpa
took me another three or four years to
even get into medical school
and so like my road has been long
and like that's just sometimes what it
takes if you're a gifted kid right you
take the scenic route in life so
oftentimes people would ask me you know
like
about stuff
when i remember when i was going to when
i started medical school and i saw
friends of mine right who were who i was
in high school with they're already
fully trained doctors and you know
flying around and all that good stuff
and i'm just like starting medical
school and i was like yeah i took the
scenic route in life and so recognize
that if you're a gifted kid like it's a
long road like you're not going to do
things faster you're not going to build
a mansion
as fast as someone else is going to
build a shack the other thing to
recognize about it being a long road if
you're a gifted kid is don't expect to
see the form of your mansion for a long
time
when other people have built their
shacks you will still just have the
foundation of the mansion it's not going
to have a roof for a long time it's not
going to have windows for a long time so
this is the other problem that gifted
kids run into
is as they put in an equal amount of
effort compared to their colleagues they
actually see less return on their
investment and that in turn shatters
their motivation and what makes them
want to give up
right because i'm putting in all this
effort i'm still not seeing anything yet
so it's a long road be patient with
yourself and try your best not to
compare to other people
the last thing to kind of consider is
that is the shame so gifted kids
oftentimes struggle a lot with
self-esteem and shame and that once
again is because their expectations are
up here and their performance is down
here right
and so in that gap is where your shame
is going to live
and so as long as there is a gap in what
you expect from yourself
with what you accomplish
you will have shame and the solution to
that oddly enough is one of two ways
right
one is you can actually
live up to the expectations that you
have right so you can actually shoot up
here and land up here so you can go to
an ivy league school or whatever right
you can go you can start
you can do a tech startup or whatever
like you can like
do everything that everyone has always
known you're capable of doing so you can
actually hit all of those metrics that's
one option then the shame will go away
or what you can do is let go of your
expectations
and bring yourself down here because the
shame exists in the gap so even if you
accept yourself as being like sort of a
failure oddly enough the shame will go
away and as you accept yourself as you
are which is not wasted potential but
like in the present like you are
everything that you're capable of
everything that you've ever been capable
of is exactly what you've achieved and
once you sort of take that attitude
bring your expectations down to here you
will be amazed at like what happens to
your motivation and what you are truly
capable of
but you can't achieve it as long as
there is that shame gap right like in
terms of performance
so questions
anyway so let me just kind of summarize
so i think that like
you know we see this a lot where a lot
of people are gifted
and we think of that as an advantage but
like i was saying earlier
i think that
you know sometimes being gifted comes
with its own set of needs
and by properly addressing those needs
we can avoid some of these things like
gifted kids you know feeling ashamed of
themselves gifted kids
you know not like comparing themselves
to like all the other normal kids and
and finding themselves lacking
um and also that we have to kind of
acknowledge that our school system is
sort of set up in a particular way that
oftentimes causes gifted kids to stumble
and through understanding like how a
gifted kid you know a child who is
gifted becomes an adult who's
perfectionistic and burnt out
we have to understand that whole life
cycle in order to sort of
start taking steps to change it
um
okay so i'm sure you've been asked this
question before and have answered before
so feel free to tell me where i can
finally answer this question how are you
able to get accepted to harvard medical
school let alone medical school alone
with such a low gpa when that is such a
critical deciding factor
how did i stand out so that's a great
question so the short answer is so i i
did some amount of graduate education so
i did a master's degree to boost my gpa
the second thing that i did i didn't go
to harvard for medical school i went to
tufts for medical school and then i did
my psychiatry training at harvard at
mass general mclean hospital
and so the short answer of like how i
wound up there is like one step at a
time
so you have to do you know in each of
those things involved like
a reality check or some degree of
humility in terms of like thinking like
i actually don't belong at harvard like
i'm never going to wind up there i had
to accept that right let alone get into
medical school
and the more that i accepted like i i
did a lot of things that were you know
humbling to say the least i wouldn't
quite say undignified but i had to
really let go of a lot of ego and like
take one step at a time it also took
perseverance i mean i applied to 120
medical schools before i got into a
single one and that was the break that i
needed
and then like understanding having all
that failure behind me i really
worked hard in medical school
and really tried to excel
and then i actually did an away rotation
for those of you don't know what that is
or for those of you do know what that is
so i basically did an audition rotation
at harvard which is like super
competitive you show up there with a
bunch of other people who want to go
there and it's basically like a test
it's like a month-long test of what
you're capable of and i did really well
so thankfully i had set up you know a
lot of good stuff over the last
eight years
in terms of being myself and like owning
the person that i was and not being
ashamed of the fact that i failed
and you know recognizing that most of
the students most of the other students
who were auditioning
um were four years younger than i was
that i was actually older than some of
the residents there
despite the fact that like they were
evaluating me right so like there's
someone two years younger who's like
giving me a grade
so navigating all that stuff was
difficult but i did a good job at it and
stayed focused and that's how i wound up
at harvard so i trained there for four
years and that's where i'm faculty now
right but it's all about like letting go
of the ego
um how do you lower expectations
uh you lower expectations by accepting
what you're capable of
like actually and so expectation and and
acceptance are at opposite ends of the
spectrum
okay so
practicing acceptance
is
how you lower expectations
so let me give you guys an example so
the theme today is
right so like let me think about a nyani
yoga exercise to let go of expectations
um
let me just think about this for a
second
so here's a good example of a nyani yoga
exercise actually i don't know if this
is a good example
this is one of the ones that i feel less
confident this is maybe a bad example of
a yoga exercise
so for the next
month or two months
when you go to a restaurant
and someone asks you what you want to
want what you want to order just tell
the waiter to surprise you
just tell them surprise me
and then pay attention
to your enjoyment or lack of enjoyment
of the food
right so when we go to restaurants
we have expectations and if we think
about the least
the worst experience that you can have
at a restaurant is not actually to have
bad food
it's to expect really good food and get
bad food that's actually worse than
getting bad food if you know a
restaurant is crap and you go there and
you order something the food that you
get is crap like what were you expecting
it's totally fine actually right we do
that every day like if you go to a fast
food like mcdonald's or taco bell or
whatever like you're not expecting you
know like a gourmet meal you're just
expecting some like mediocre arguably
incredibly tasty
depending on whether you're getting a
mexican pizza or not
which you can't get anymore because
they're out of
sad
but
so like a lot of if you guys want to
really understand so this is the way
that nyanio works if you really want to
understand expectation and acceptance
you have to put yourself in situations
that are like free from expectation
and you can't put yourself in a
situation because the expectation
doesn't come from the situation right
it's even that's
even what i said was kind of wrong
you have to practice
messing with your expectations so go to
restaurant just say surprise me
or you can ask if they don't know like
if they're taking it back you can say
what's good here okay i'll take that
right if you've got dietary restrictions
tell them about the dietary restrictions
and just like and then you're like but
what if i don't like the food that i get
well yeah i mean that's the point right
so like just eat what you get and see
what happens
and they're like but i don't like it and
it's like yes so like pay attention to
that and be like how hard is it for you
to order food that you're not gonna like
or you order without expectations what's
it like to go to a restaurant and accept
that you're going to just get some
random pile of food that could be
amazing and could be something that you
really dislike
that's how you gain acceptance that's
how you let go of expectations by
literally going to a restaurant and like
actively letting them go
that is the nyani yog
and then you may discover all kinds of
cool things right you may even discover
for example that if you go to the
restaurant and you expect
crap if you're like this is going to be
an absolute train wreck i'm gonna have
to go home and like have a bowl of
cereal after the meal
it'll be really interesting
how much you enjoy your meal it'll be
really interesting because in that
moment what you're doing is letting go
of the expectation
right and then like suddenly even if you
get crap it's not a big deal and if you
get something delicious it's like such a
huge win and that's what it means to let
go of expectation the more you let go of
expectation the more you start to enjoy
life and the better life gets
it's kind of bizarre
so literally if you guys wanted nyani
yoga practice to let go of expectations
and earn acceptance and you can't just
do this once right so you can't like
wuss out of it
you have to do it for a month
presuming you're going to go out to eat
you know and you can afford that and all
that good stuff
otherwise like make it three months
like
you know do it for a while like commit
yourself this is my life now gg get
wrecked noobs
so
try it you guys want to learn nyan yog
try it
okay someone else is asking how should a
parent teacher or manager support the
special needs of gifted people if what's
happening now is bad that's a great
question so i'll give you an example
so sometimes i get parents that come
into my office
they have a kid who's addicted to video
games why is a kid addicted to video
games really simple
because video games match the pace of
the child right that's why that's why
gifted kids in a nutshell the reason
that gifted kids get addicted to video
games is one very very very simple
reason can all be reduced to this
games match the pace of the child and
school doesn't
so you've got a kid goes to school gets
a worksheet does the worksheet i still
remember i i had this experience i
skipped the first grade so this is what
happened
i went to a school
where you know i'd do a worksheet and
then like they'd give me another one and
so in in my first day of first grade i
moved schools i i gave them you know i
got a worksheet i did the worksheet i
gave it back to them and i said can i
have the next one and she's like what do
you mean the next one it's like the next
one like whatever's next like i'm done
with this we've got class for another 45
minutes i'm done with this can i have
the next one she's like there is no next
one i'm like what
and it didn't take long where like you
know she gave me the then she evaluated
me and i got moved up a grade but same
problem there
and then eventually like what heck is
like school moves at the pace of like
the slowest person now here's the really
addictive thing about a video game now
imagine you're just bored at school
because it's moving at a snail's pace
right because there's like other
six-year-olds and like you're a
six-year-old two and maybe you're a
little smarter than the other
six-year-olds now enter a video game
what happens when you don't beat level
one
you replay level one and what happens
when you beat level one you go straight
to level two and if you beat level two
you go straight to level three you beat
level three you go straight to level
four
so games perfectly match
the challenge
that a human being is capable of right
if you get stuck on a boss in dark souls
like
you don't get to move past the boss
because your parents make a phone call
to from software and they're like hey my
son is really good at video games can
you please advance him past this boss
and stick him to the next boss it's like
you can't do that in dark souls like
dark souls doesn't give a
right
so like kids get addicted to video games
because they perfectly match what you're
capable of which is exactly what kids
like there's this whole thing called
intent to mastery we teach all this
stuff to parents and things like that
so what do you do if you've got a kid
who's gifted you challenge them and you
don't rely on school to do it for you so
when parents come to me and they're like
i have a kid who's addicted to video
games he's 16. he thinks school is i ask
him okay what do you think about schools
like school is boring
then what i do is i you know i make a
couple of phone calls and i'm like we're
gonna like you so we were i was back
when i was in boston a lot of cool
startups in boston so what i'll do is
we'll make some phone calls we'll stick
them in an internship somewhere like
we'll take some college-level internship
it's some kind of startup so like we'll
look around at like incubators from like
mit or whatever like harvard will be
like hey like there's a kid do you guys
have any internship opportunities
available and we'll stick him there and
he'll like be he'll work there for the
summer and it like turns the kid right
around no more video games because he's
actually like learning so i stuck one
kid in this startup that was
that there's an app you take a picture
of a mole on your body and it tells you
the percentage chance that the mole is
cancerous
right so we stick the kid there we're
like go help them
and then like sometimes the kid is like
what am i supposed to do like you start
by getting them coffee
and then maybe you'll learn something
and then it's it's actually fantastic
like they do they do really well you
challenge them right and because the
cool thing is that a lot of the startup
folks they sort of recognize because
some of them are like misfits too so
they're like okay there's like a kid
here like let's put them to work because
they recognize that okay you're 16. so
you know how to like manage sql data
databases and the kid is like no they're
like
google it
and learn and then you're going to
manage our sql database next week
and the kid is like what and like yeah
and then suddenly the kid is like goes
home he's not playing video games he's
like reading about sql databases
or whatever
right just just stick them stick them
into it and challenge them
so as a parent you know or a teacher
like i'd say like ask them so here's the
biggest mistake that parents and
teachers make with gifted children
is that you
when when a gifted child fails what we
tend to do is slow down instead what you
need to do is speed up it's absolutely
terrifying so if a gifted child is
failing what they need more than
anything else is a bigger challenge not
like an easier environment now you have
to make sure for a couple of other
things like you need to make sure
there's not adhd going on depression
going on learning disabilities or other
things like that going on but in the
absence of all of those things challenge
them more not less
ask them to do more give them put them
in positions of leadership
right
and just push them
because like it's so fulfilling when
when you're a take a kid in that
situation and you're like
you're gonna need to do this thing and
they're like i can't do that thing and
you're like okay so then fail
but try if you fail like no big deal but
i'm not gonna i'm not gonna expect less
of you i know it's kind of paradoxical
because we just talked about letting go
of expectation
but it's not really expectations it's
really having faith in them it's a
subtle difference but be like i have
faith in you i think you can handle it
so like give it your best shot
that's what you do you challenge them
respect them
is instead of expect things from them
you